feature, NGINX One: Add release note for certs on CSGs (#230)
nginx/documentation: content/nginx-one/changelog.md

## January 20, 2025

### Manage certificates with Config Sync Groups

With the NGINX One Console, you can now:

> Manage certificates in Config Sync Groups. The certificate can be managed or unmanaged. You can:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Manage certificate deployment in Config Sync Groups. You can:
```

- Add a certificate to a Config Sync Group

> - Remove a certificate from a Config Sync Group

Reviewer: We should try to be consistent with the term we use, maybe we could mention "deploy", i.e., "Deploy a certificate to a CSG", and "remove a deployed certificate from a CSG".

Author: I was worried about this after our internal discussion on "undeploy." 

However, you're right about staying consistent with terminology. We have section titles like "Remove a deployed certificate" which I'll replicate here:

```suggestion
- Remove a deployed certificate from a Config Sync Group
```

> - Delete deployed certificates

Reviewer: I didn't see where we explain what deploying certificates mean in the doc, but this is a terminology we use in the NGINX One Console UI (i.e., deployment status). Users could see the deployment status of a deployed certificate, which indicates whether the latest version of certificate was deployed.

Also we currently don't support deleting a certificate from all the affected data planes. This functionality is coming up. I might have misunderstood what `Delete deployed certificates` means in terms of CSGs, and this feature sounds similar to `Remove a certificate from a CSG`.

Author: I think we describe the differences in the two sections: 

- [Remove a deployed certificate](https://docs.nginx.com/nginx-one/how-to/certificates/manage-certificates/#remove-a-deployed-certificate)
   - which removes the certificate from "an independent instance or a Config Sync Group" 
- [Delete a deployed certificate](https://docs.nginx.com/nginx-one/how-to/certificates/manage-certificates/#delete-a-deployed-certificate)
   - This deletes the certificate completely - IIRC, we discussed the warning how this might lead "to failure in affected NGINX deployments"

Author: if I misunderstood the discussion which led to these two sections, lmk, and we'll open a new issue/PR to fix that.

Reviewer: Ahh I see, thanks for clarifying. Brannon will be releasing new functionalities regarding file actions users could do in the config editor, so in the future we could include a section that provides instructions on how to remove a deployed certificate perhaps in a separate page similar to: https://docs.nginx.com/nginx-one/how-to/config-sync-groups/add-file-csg/ which includes instructions on how to add a certificate file through config editor.

I was reading the paragraph for https://docs.nginx.com/nginx-one/how-to/certificates/manage-certificates/#remove-a-deployed-certificate, and I did not see any mention of a config editor. I'd suggest that we add some instructions on how to do this through the config editor as mentioned above. Let me know what your thoughts are, thank you Mike!

Reviewer: I worry that https://docs.nginx.com/nginx-one/how-to/certificates/manage-certificates/#delete-a-deployed-certificate deleting a deployed certificate is too similar to removing a deployed certificate. The only difference between the two is that when users choose to delete a managed cert object from N1 console, there is a checkbox which allows them to remove the certificate from the instances/CSGs where it was deployed to. One is for removing a single certificate from a single instance/CSG, the other one is for removing a single certificate from multiple instances/CSGs.

IMHO, the story flows more smoothly and there is less mental energy required for the customers to track the difference between those two actions, if we rename the section for `delete a deployed certificate` to just `delete a managed certificate` and explains how users could remove a certificate from multiple instances/CSGs where it was deployed.

In the `delete a managed certificate` section, we could explain that users could delete a managed cert from N1 console, and meanwhile they also have the option to remove a deployed certificate from all the affected instances/CSGs where it was deployed to. In this way, we are also consistent with what we mean by removing a deployed certificate.

I hope this makes sense!

Reviewer: https://docs.nginx.com/nginx-one/how-to/certificates/manage-certificates/#remove-a-deployed-certificate
Also, rereading this section, some suggestions I have:

> Remove a deployed certificate
> You can remove a deployed certificate from an independent instance or from a Config Sync Group. This will remove the certificate’s association with the instance or group, but it does not delete the certificate files from the instance(s).
> 
> Every instance with a deployed certificate includes paths to certificates in their configuration files. If you remove the deployed file path to one certificate, that change is limited to that one instance.
> 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
> but it does not delete the certificate files from the instance(s).

This is not true, it would remove the cert files from instances/CSGs, when they use the config editor to delete a deployed certificate from certain file paths.

> Every instance with a deployed certificate includes paths to certificates in their configuration files.

This is also not true, since customers could choose to add a certificate file to a data plane instance, without referencing this certificate using those file paths in the NGINX configuration file. 

To clarify, the option that lets users to remove a deployed certificate through the config editor will remove the cert deployment from the data planes. This means that the certificate will be deleted from the file paths that were previously deployed. From the users' perspective, they shouldn't worry about the term "association", as this is a concept managed internally in the backend implementation, to keep track of the fact that the certificate was either deployed to a data plane instance under certain file paths, or the certificate was removed from previously deployed file paths on a data plane plane.

In public-facing docs, I'd recommend keeping the terminologies high-level, and mention the actions to either add a cert file under specified file paths versus the action to remove a certificate from previously deployed file paths.

Author: I think the "right" place to address these are in separate issues against the main docs, not the release notes.

For the purpose of release notes, minimal detail is required. Therefore, now that I've opened https://github.com/nginx/documentation/issues/256, I think the right approach for this PR is:

```suggestion
```

Reviewer: Agree, thank you opening another PR, Mike!

> For more information, including warnings about risks, see our documentation on how you can [Manage certificates]({{< relref "/nginx-one/how-to/certificates/manage-certificates.md" >}})

Reviewer: Let's also add a link to this doc which provides instructions on how to add a certificate to a CSG.
 https://frontdoor-test-docs.nginx.com/previews/docs/230/nginx-one/how-to/config-sync-groups/add-file-csg/

Author: ```suggestion
For more information, including warnings about risks, see our documentation on how you can [Add a file]({{< relref "/nginx-one/how-to/nginx-configs/add-file.md" >}}) [Manage certificates]({{< relref "/nginx-one/how-to/certificates/manage-certificates.md" >}})
```

> For more information, including warnings about risks, see our documentation on how you can [Add a file]({{< relref "/nginx-one/how-to/nginx-configs/add-file.md" >}}) [Manage certificates]({{< relref "/nginx-one/how-to/certificates/manage-certificates.md" >}})

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more information, including warnings about risks, see our documentation on how you can:
- [Add a file]({{< relref "/nginx-one/how-to/nginx-configs/add-file.md" >}}) 
- [Manage certificates]({{< relref "/nginx-one/how-to/certificates/manage-certificates.md" >}})

```

## January 20, 2025

### Manage certificates with Config Sync Groups

> With the NGINX One Console, you can now:
> 
> Manage certificate deployment in Config Sync Groups. You can:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With the NGINX One Console, you can now manage certificate deployment in Config Sync Groups. 

You can:
```

The rhythm of the colon and line break read really weird to me. 

Based on the next section "Revert a configuration", there's precedent, but it feels like there should be a list of items following it, not a single one.

- Add a certificate to a Config Sync Group
- Remove a deployed certificate from a Config Sync Group

For more information, including warnings about risks, see our documentation on how you can:

> - [Add a file]({{< relref "/nginx-one/how-to/nginx-configs/add-file.md" >}}) 
> - [Manage certificates]({{< relref "/nginx-one/how-to/certificates/manage-certificates.md" >}})

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [Add a file]({{< ref "/nginx-one/how-to/nginx-configs/add-file.md" >}}) 
- [Manage certificates]({{< ref "/nginx-one/how-to/certificates/manage-certificates.md" >}})
```

Small nits: `relref` has been the historic shortcode we've used, but it's intended for relative references.

Since we give absolute path each time, I've been updating links to to just use `ref` as I go.

Reviewer 2: The last option does not fire a Hugo error when a link is changed: it silently fails if a link breaks.

Instead of a documentation author discovering and taking responsibility for fixing a link if, for example, moving or renaming a bunch of files as part of IA refactoring, it has to be detected by a link checker at a later stage.

Author: > it has to be detected by a link checker at a later stage.

I'm not convinced that's a bad thing. After all, we've had to use the CI/CD link checker to find numerous broken links to due changes in external URLs.

And the "later stage" for IA refactoring would happen during a PR.

## January 20, 2025

### Manage certificates with Config Sync Groups

With the NGINX One Console, you can now:

Manage certificate deployment in Config Sync Groups. You can:

- Add a certificate to a Config Sync Group
- Remove a deployed certificate from a Config Sync Group

For more information, including warnings about risks, see our documentation on how you can:
- [Add a file]({{< relref "/nginx-one/how-to/nginx-configs/add-file.md" >}}) 
- [Manage certificates]({{< relref "/nginx-one/how-to/certificates/manage-certificates.md" >}})

> 

Author: ```suggestion
```
